[Music]
on tonight's panel poor Scully deputy
chairman of the Conservative Party and
MP since 2015 and a campaigner for
brexit in the 2016 referendum Labour's
shadow Secretary of State for Health
former adviser to Gordon Brown and Ed
Miliband John Ashworth Leyla Moran
elected as an MP in 2017 by overturning
a majority of 10,000 now in Liberal
Democrat spokesperson for education
first vice-president of the European
Parliament and an MEP for FINA Gail
Mairead McGuinness and journalist and
author Isabel Oh shot
[Applause]
[Music]
welcome on this Halloween night to our
panel for our audience here and of
course you at home join in the
conversation you can argue along in the
usual fashion using hashtag ggqt on
facebook on instagram and on twitter
right let's get started with our first
question tonight
which is from Fiona Marie can general
election solve the Briggs it crisis well
marieve we've got you here on the
program tonight I mean it's the 31st of
October I guess you thought you'd be
talking about something else
like we were gonna be out goodbye
Russian I think that's why I was invited
to be on this program because it's
always glad you came before there was
talk of an election so yes I think we
had all anticipated that this would be
if you're a grexit day and your question
about how a general election can solve
it I suppose has been three years where
there has been no solution but I think
we're closer to getting a resolution
from a European Parliament point of view
on the European Union we would like to
move on we would like to get to the next
phase of this I'm not sure how an
election will turn out so then Frank it
was sold a brexit crisis that's the
question well we had an election in the
past that didn't it exacerbated its
problem to some extent so I'm not sure
what would happen this someone who is
too early the campaign hasn't started we
knew there would be an election I think
Boris Johnson was looking for that I
think it is interesting though that the
withdrawal agreement got through a first
stage in the House of Commons so that
was the first time we saw that there was
some progress I think the fact that we
ought to move into 2020 and brexit is
not finished it's quite extraordinary I
think as an audience you must find that
extraordinary whichever way you voted
that you know imagine 2016 and 2020
samret Canarsie were you surprised in
Italy you the Boris Yeltsin didn't push
on with his wind rule III thought he
might and I'm not sure why perhaps these
other panelists will understand why he
decided to freeze the process rather
than move along with it because there
was some time that the House of Commons
could have looked at the details of the
bill and perhaps the House of Lords and
it perhaps could have been done with a
slight extension but look there may be
other reasons why the Prime Minister
decided he needed to go to the contrary
perhaps to get an overall majority but
that was tried in the past by the last
Prime Minister
and I'm sure other people on this panel
have other hopes and dreams for what
might come of the next election
well whatever way I think the
uncertainty level it's awful for you I
think it's awful for us it's often for
business and it's awful for Europe as a
whole there's so many other issues that
we need to deal with the European level
and you need to deal with nationally
pushing for this election in the back
end of last week this is clearly
something you want to happen presumably
before revoke article 50 could possibly
become something that is obsolete if the
election doesn't get your way indeed so
we really we really wanted actually the
cleaner way to have done this would have
been to put the brexit deal in a
referendum back to the people and asking
[Applause]
it got through Boris Johnson's bad
breaks a deal got through off the back
of labour votes through that second
reading we know about this like will the
general election solve the price crisis
that's a green felt that this was the
only way that the public could have
their say on this deal and get their say
on if they want brexit at all brexit has
been crisis is the right word Fiona
you're absolutely right this is a crisis
it's a national embarrassment we need to
move on and there is no other way to
actually make this stop and perhaps
that's one thing we can all agree on we
need to make this stop we need to focus
on other things and that's why the
Liberal Democrats are stopped standing
on a manifesto commitment to stop brexit
once and for all no deal in further
negotiation no let's negotiate another
deal and put it back in another no we
would make it stop on day one we'd move
on and talk about public services and
everything else that people actually
want politicians to deal with right now
[Applause]
so so John filet but I mean I think the
impression that lead was desperately
keen oh okay okay for an election when
you look when you say you're keen what
do you think it will tell you when
there's four and a half million people
on the waiting list and over 600,000
waiting beyond 18 weeks for treatment
we're desperately Kieffer's into it by
the Lib Dem to the SNP calling for it
before you know we become for general
that once once the times but to answer
Fiona's question can this general
election solved the Praxis crisis well
it has to because today today we were
supposed to leave the European Union
Boris Johnson promised us that on the
31st of October we would leave the EU
do-or-die
he said he would rather die in a ditch
then not leave well I've not I've not
noticed if he's in a ditch or not on his
solemn pledge to the British people so
we do need a general election and in
that general election I'm sorry I don't
think it's democratic just to cancel
brexit I voted remain as well but I
don't think he'd just say Oh we'll
cancel it I think the Democratic thing
to do is put it back to you guys he's
put it back to the British people and
give you a wrapper
yeah only you asked this question do you
think a general election is the way to
sell the brexit crisis no no I don't for
one thing what happens if we have a hung
parliament but where does that leave us
[Applause]
marade was saying about the virus didn't
need to call a general election at the
moment because he had got the withdrawal
act through the second reading so why
did he call it a general election for
December just before Christmas we don't
want to be thinking about a flippin
general election ever want to be getting
out and buying our Christmas presents so
so close by why didn't he stick with why
didn't post on trying to get the drill
but it secularly given that during the
leadership campaign Boris Johnson said
it would be the height of folly to have
an election before or exit because we
are where we are we're in a situation
where Boris has tried to inject some
positivity some energy some enthusiasm
into this whole debate I think if you
whatever you think about Boris whatever
you think about the direction is taken
you cannot fail to see that he is taking
he has a sense of direction they want
signature by October the 31st which like
twice now we should now be talking about
how we're leaving not still whether
we're leaving and what has happened is
that he put the bill through Parliament
and yes people agreed to that first
stage the second reading but it was
clear by voting down the programme
motion though they were played there was
going to be playing games where they
engage with with the with the with with
the bill they're talking about the
customs union was all part of the second
democratic this is all part of the
future relationship not how we leave
this taking back so it is absolutely
clear that the only way that we can get
this sorted out is through a general
election we have a parliament that does
not represent public view it man does
not
so look the truth is that there is a
horrible possibility as the lady there
said that this general election will not
actually solve the brexit situation
because I could well be a hung
parliament and the only way that this
election will solve the brexit situation
is if there is a big leave alliance so
that will involve the Tories swallowing
their pride and doing some kind of deal
whether it's informal or formal with a
brexit party otherwise is that the leave
vote will be split up and down the
country and the toys will not be able to
win a majority and will be all the way
back where we were to begin with and I
would just like to ask Leila here I am
genuinely bewildered this is a genuine
question here your idea is just a stock
brexit I just wonder what do you think
the seventeen point four million people
who voted for brexit are actually going
to do if you just scrap it do you think
that they are just going to kind of
slope off and accept that they were too
wrong they were really stupid they're
just going to go back way they're not on
Iran don't put words in my mouth
first of all to make sure it's very
clear if the Liberal Democrats are
elected in a majority government on a
stop brexit manifesto then that's what
we're gonna do that's exactly what we're
going on sir my credits that lead can I
just say I think most people now are
sick of these panels talking about
breaks it all the time let's speak to
the audience and see what they NHS it's
schools and actually the only way to
make Parliament talk about anything else
is to stop bricks it actually I think
they'd appreciate that well let's ask
them let us because there's lots of
hands I'd like to hear from Lottie
yes the young man there and the t-shirt
well I was too young to vote in the
referendum however it was a democratic
choice the Lib Dems and the Labour Party
are an absolute disgrace the lived
[Applause]
democracy means and the Labour Party's
manifesto of 2017 was to deliver brexit
and all that done is both against it
every chance bring on a general election
and I hope Boris gets a majority
delivers brexit and defeats a Marxist
Jeremy Corbyn go
so I'm just curious as to how many MPs
have quarterly reviews because if you
were in any other job other than the one
you're in I'd have you all on
performance improvement plans the
government doesn't represent the
population but no I said Parliament
doesn't the Parliament sorry and the
Parliament doesn't represent the
population but this is the third time
that we're asking people who they want
to represent them but we haven't asked
them for an up-to-date opinion or where
they stand today on I and I are we
quoting 17 million people do every
single one of those 17 million people
still feel the same don't know we
actually don't know people may have gone
in both directions I'll take a few more
points then you can ask the man at the
back with his hand it in the black top
is this election gonna be on anything
aside from brexit so are there other
actually army working GP in the NHS and
I see day after day access problem has
been a massive massive issue but it
seems as this is just going to be a
second referendum pretty much if you
voted leave your or you voted remain you
just want to see what your politicians
actually vote voting for really and I
think we need to kind of focus on other
issues as well as brexit okay and the
woman here in the corner I voted remain
in 2016 but have changed my mind and
well it'd be a travesty I think if it
was a second referendum
can I ask you what's made you change
your mind lots of issues really but
mostly the treatment of leavers I would
hear I work with a lot of disadvantaged
people who did vote to leave and I think
it's really unfair that they've been
smeared and labeled as fascists
the right panel that the woman at the
very back with the glasses and we're
talking about whether we think a general
election can solve brexit I think
actually we've forgotten that what live
is accused of breaking electoral law is
an advisor to Boris Johnson is currently
in such a position of power yet he
refused to stand before Parliament and
talk about breaking electoral law he's
in contempt of Parliament I'm not sure
whether we can ever have a free and
democratic and fair election before
those issues are sorted out I'm not sure
we can solve brexit in this way I think
when it comes to the levy you campaign
they would as far as I know ever they
were cleared of a number of things
actually so I'm not I'm not entirely
sure that you're right about that they
so they were founded they were accused
of overspending and they spend money on
but no criminal charges were brought in
absolutely not no criminal charges were
brought against non-green capital Phi
Sandra main groups were fined as the
vast majority of allegations about both
the leave campaigns were proved to be
completely unfounded this is propaganda
and the Electoral Commission which is
highly biased refused to investigate the
other side to the extent and well I'm
not sure they'd agree they're highly but
anyway let's but I'm going to a couple
of points why go back to panelist the
man in the yellow shift at the very back
okay so I voted for Jonathan's party
labor in 2017 under the premise that
they'd respect and support the outcome
of the 2016 referendum since then you
know I can't believe you have the
absolute audacity to sit there and
criticize Boris what he's actually made
an effort to get us out and respect we
voted for you it's almost like you've
got a case of Romania amnesia you've
sold your soul outs of liberal eat and
the irony is a lot of them aren't very
satisfied with you either they're going
towards later in the Lib Dems so
actually people have come down this
country tonight going trick-or-treating
I really hope that you don't fool people
the second time around and I hope that
the latest poll readings give you a
Halloween fright
yes the woman sitting next to you I
personally think that a general election
where it's so the pop of brexit and that
we should put it back into the hands of
the people because I as part of the
almost so you want another referendum
yes I want another referendum because I
[Applause]
people who were born between 1998 and
2001 who can now vote want a say in
something that's going to impact the
rest of my life I don't think democracy
is something to be scared of and
ultimately the people should decide this
is one of the biggest questions facing
the book but some people thought we
would leave with no deal so there's sort
of brexit party in Nigel Farrar say we
should have a clean break a World Trade
Organisation No Deal Boris Johnson is
putting forward a deal which we don't
agree with and the gentleman here in the
t-shirt who you know I respect I respect
that the way in which you put your views
in a very forthright forthright way we
did say in our manifesto that we respect
the result but we couldn't support a
damaging No Deal brexit nor could we
support a brexit which undermines
workplace rights and environmental
standards and I'm afraid that's what
Boris Johnson's deal does the Tory party
by the way is playing games Boris
Johnson's deal got through its first
stage in Parliament and then Boris
Johnson pulled the bill and refused to
negotiate in Parliament with the other
parties about getting a sensible
timetable so Boris Johnson's Tory party
is playing games with brexit as well I'm
afraid
[Applause]
[Music]